# 9. Palindrome Number
#leetcode #easy #success

## Question
Given an integer `x`, return `true` if `x` is palindrome integer.

An integer is a **palindrome** when it reads the same backward as forward.
-   For example, `121` is a palindrome while `123` is not.

###### Example 1:
```
Input: x = 121
Output: true
Explanation: 121 reads as 121 from left to right and from right to left.
```

###### Example 2:
```
Input: x = -121
Output: false
Explanation: From left to right, it reads -121. From right to left, it becomes 121-. Therefore it is not a palindrome.
```
###### Example 3:
```
Input: x = 10
Output: false
Explanation: Reads 01 from right to left. Therefore it is not a palindrome.
```

###### Constraints:
-   `-231 <= x <= 231 - 1`

Follow up: Could you solve it without converting the integer to a string?

---
## Solution
### Initial Solution
- Let's do it without converting the integer.
- We could pop each digit and add to an array then check the array. This seems similar to converting to a string.
- Another option would be reverse half the integer and check if both halves are equal.

```typescript
function isPalindrome(x: number): boolean {
    if (x < 0 || (x%10 == 0 && x!=0)) return false;
    let left = x;
    let right = 0;
    
    while (left > right) {
        right = (right*10) + (left%10);
        left = Math.trunc(left / 10);
    }
    
    return left == right || left == Math.trunc(right/10);
};
```

###### Analysis
>[!success]
> - Runtime: 323 ms, faster than 30.79% of TypeScript online submissions for Palindrome Number.
> - Memory Usage: 51.6 MB, less than 69.10% of TypeScript online submissions for Palindrome Number.

### LeetCode Solution 1: Revert half of the number
###### Algorithm
First of all we should take care of some edge cases. All negative numbers are not palindrome, for example: -123 is not a palindrome since the '-' does not equal to '3'. So we can return false for all negative numbers.

Now let's think about how to revert the last half of the number. For number `1221`, if we do `1221 % 10`, we get the last digit `1`, to get the second to the last digit, we need to remove the last digit from `1221`, we could do so by dividing it by 10, `1221 / 10 = 122`. Then we can get the last digit again by doing a modulus by 10, `122 % 10 = 2`, and if we multiply the last digit by 10 and add the second last digit, `1 * 10 + 2 = 12`, it gives us the reverted number we want. Continuing this process would give us the reverted number with more digits.

Now the question is, how do we know that we've reached the half of the number?

Since we divided the number by 10, and multiplied the reversed number by 10, when the original number is less than the reversed number, it means we've processed half of the number digits.

###### Implementation
Essentially the same as my implementation.